Why Formulas are the Best, or how I learned that I don't know anything about 'good' music:

I'm surrounded by some incredibly smart people at Northwestern University, and as a liberal arts university it brings together a fantastically varied set of intellectual interests and general knowledge. Living in an environment like this, especially in a community and amongst friends who wear their passions on their sleeve, brings plenty of conversations where talking about each other's day turns into analytics of policy, philosophical propositions, and a host of other ideas. As a result, I have the pleasure of soaking it all up like a sponge. I don't have a day where I don't fall asleep without something new that I've learned. One of these things is the theoretical analysis of music. 

(ASIDE TIME) I first had the pleasure of experiencing this during my summers at ECC. One of my best friends there is currently studying classical guitar at URI, and for a while he has been a total musical nerd. I think he knew that he had few peers who could keep up with his level of knowledge, so he reserved his moments of outburst for ones of pure joy and excitement. He was down for any day to get ignorant to whatever terrible rap I was playing back in the day, so long as he had the chance to lay on the picnic tables and straight giggle over the triple-arpeggio-over-staccato-g-flat-minor that he just heard. I absolutely loved these moments; they were completely selfish in that he didn't need anyone else around him to enjoy it, but selfless in that he was so willing to share his joy with everyone else. 

Anywho, Northwestern, music, formulas. got it. So I am a huge fan of folky, homegrown artist Oftentimes, its a "whole is better than the sum of its parts" thing. They try not to impress anyone with any individual aspect of their music. Their acoustic guitar(s) slide in and out of prominence, providing a warm feel and melodic backing. Their singing is full of simple harmonies and lyrics that don't impress, but work by just sounding 'right'. Finally, they all shamelessly build to an amazing climax into all of their songs. Shout-singing followed by soft-singing-with-no-instruments followed by melodic-reprise-that-makes-you-want-to-go-and-run-through-a-cornfield-or-something. In short, they are entirely predictable. 

I don't even know where I'm going with this. I was going to indirectly complain about how some people value too much over the technical quality of music without just recognizing that the artists simply have figured out how to tease emotion out of you.


THIS COULD BE TWO REALLY REALLY COOL BLOG POSTS. ANDRE DESERVES HIS OWN. FORMULAIC MUSIC DESERVES ITS OWN CAUSE IT HAS SOME REALLY COOL WRITING ELEMENTS WITH THE HYPHENS AND SHIT AND BECAUSE I WOULD LOVE TO BE ABLE TO PUT INTO WORDS WHY MUMFORD AND SONS DESERVES TO EXIST